Hello there and welcome back to a new
section here in the RAIO program.
I hope you enjoyed that first section.
And remember, you know,
you're gonna get used to this method.
It's gonna take a little
bit of time, okay?
And if you have any questions,
we're here to help you.
Remember that in the course
you can always ask us for help.
You can go to the student group or you can
click here and get in contact with us
on WhatsApp if there's anything you need,
anything you wonder about
these sections here.
But remember, be a bit patient here.
It's going to take some time to get used
to this method and then you're just gonna
be up and running and learning
a lot every single day.
So, I hope you're excited to get
started here with the next section.
Remember, it's all about, remember one
of the RAIO rules, consistency over intensity.
If you have done the introduction,
the first section and this section here
in the same day, take a break, relax,
take a break, come back tomorrow.
It is so much more important to me that
you do something every single day than
spending a lot of time on one day, right?
Because through consistency you will build
habits and habits are automatic
and that will help you learn
faster and more effectively.
Okay?
So if you need to pause this video
right here in the middle of the video
and then continue another day,
that's fine, you can do that,
that's no problem, right?
So feel free to just pause in the middle
of a section, an exercise, and just come
back and resume tomorrow, the next day.
The most important thing is consistency.
Okay?
Now let's jump into the next section here.
We're going to be talking
about family here.
And
family is a big theme that a lot of you
guys have requested to be able to talk
about your family and talk about other
families, typically something we
do in most conversations, right?
Talk about family.
So, the same method,
watch this short explanatory video here
with subtitles in your language so
that you understand
everything that I'm saying.
And then you listen to the normal
version a couple of times, right?
So you get used to the story and then you
go on to the interactive version where
you're gonna listen many, many times
and answer the questions out loud.
You only say yes or no.
That's the only thing
you need to do.
On time.
Quickly.
Boom.
No thinking, no translating in your head.
Just go straight. Yes, no!
If you're wrong, it doesn't
matter, just keep going.
Okay?
And your goal is to repeat as many times
as it requires you to be able to answer
all the questions correctly, out loud,
on time,
without looking at the transcript, then
you're able to go to that next section.
If you're able to do that with just
a couple of repetitions instead of 10.
That's fine. Go to the next section.
That is completely fine.
You have one objective and that is to be
able to answer the questions out loud and
understand it, on time, without looking.
Okay?
So this is the story of
section number two here, Family.
Remember, if you're an intermediate
speaker or advanced speaker,
just because you understand everything
doesn't mean it's too easy, okay?
It's good to understand everything.
That gives you more comprehension
and that will make you learn more.
So as a beginner, a student who's
starting from zero or starting
from a basic level,
you're gonna need more repetitions
and that's fine, more repetitions
so that you understand better.
Okay?
Now, let's get started.
I hope you're excited here.
Let's go.
So "I have a huge family".
I have a huge family.
Huge.
We can also say massive, right?
Massive or big, right?
I have a huge, massive.
I have a big family. Okay?
"I have five brothers and six sisters".
So remember, we have
one, two, three, four, five, six,
seven, eight, nine, ten. Boom.
One, two, three, four, five,
six, seven, eight, nine, ten.
5 brothers, six sisters.
Brothers.
Sisters.
Very important pronunciation tip.
In English...
All the words that start with an S,
we just make that S sound.
Sisters. Okay?
Sisters.
We don't say "e-sisters" as in Spanish.
In Spanish, you would say "es".
In English, we just say the S sound.
Sisters.
Six.
We don't say "esix" or "esisters".
We say six sisters.
Okay?
I have five brothers and six sisters.
"I have a mother and father".
I have a mother and father.
"They are my parents".
So my mother and father are my parents.
Okay?
They are my parents, right?
"I have a grandmother".
I have a grandmother.
Grandmother is the mother of my mother.
"She is 84 years old".
Okay?
Remember we had twenty, twenty,
"thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, seventy,"
"eighty, ninety, one - hundred", right?
So this is "eighty".
eighty, eighty.
Boom.
80.
We say eighty-four.
84.
She is 84 years old.
Okay.
Remember again, we don't
"say she has 84 years."
We say "she is 84 years old."
"My oldest sister has one son".
One son.
Pronunciation tip!
"Has" is pronounced like this, "hazz."
Hazz.
Okay.
It's not "hasss" with an S.
Even though it's spelled with an S,
it's pronounced like this, "hazz".
If you want to sound more
native, you say "hazz".
My oldest sister has one son.
One son.
Okay?
"Son".
In Spanish we say hijo.
But you can also say "sun".
And that is "el sol", right?
In Spanish.
So the pronunciation is
the same but different words.
"He is my nephew".
He is my nephew.
Okay?
So my older sister has one son.
He is my nephew.
Again!
"Is."
"He is".
"Is" also pronounced as a "Z".
He "izzz" my nephew.
We don't say "he iss".
We say "he izz".
He is my nephew.
"We live in Lima, Peru".
"My mother has a brother".
My mother "hazzz" a brother.
"He is my uncle", right?
So we say,
"my oldest sister has a son."
She has one son.
My sister's son is my nephew, right?
My mother has a brother.
He is my uncle, right?
"My father has a sister".
"She is my aunt", okay?
"Aunt, uncle, aunt, uncle, aunt".
Right?
So tío, tía in Spanish.
"My aunt and uncle live outside the city".
My aunt and uncle live outside the city.
They live outside the city.
"Outside of the city" or
"outside the city."
Okay?
"My aunt has one daughter."
"She is my cousin."
So.My father's sister's
daughter is my cousin, right?
"I like to spend time with my family".
I like to spend time, spend time.
Spend time.
So "spend".
We say that "we spend money",
for example.
In Spanish you would say "gastar".
But it's not really "gastar".
It's not really "spending".
"Spend time" actually means,
you know,
invertir tiempo, pasar tiempo.
Spend time.
"With my family."
Rather than "wasting time."
It's not wasting,
it's just spending time.
"Spend time with my family."
"I like to spend time with my family."
I like to eat with my family.
"My family likes to play soccer".
All right?
The one who writes these stories
is a writer on our team
and I'm going to tell her
that it's called "football".
It's not called soccer.
It's called football.
As a European, I don't
like the word "soccer".
We say soccer in the United States,
but in the rest of the world,
we say football, right?
It's because in the United States,
football is what they refer
to as American football.
So that's why they invented
this word here, soccer.
Which is weird, because American football,
you never hit the ball with the foot,
like very rarely, only with your hands.
Strange.
Crazy Americans.
"My brothers and sisters
are good players".
They are good players.
Good soccer players, right?
"My father and mother
like to watch us play".
"Us."
They like to watch us play.
My father and mother,
they, like to watch us play.
"My parents cheer when we play well."
When we play good.
When we play well.
When we play awesome.
"They cheer."
"To cheer."
We say that sound, "ch".
Cheer.
They cheer on us.
Okay?
Cheer.
Have you heard this word before?
Maybe?
"Cheerleader".
Cheerleader.
A cheerleader.
You know what that is, right?
You've seen that before?
These are cheerleaders.
These are cheerleaders, right?
And they cheer on a team.
So my parents,
they cheer when we play well.
"Wohoo! Yes!"
Alright, great.
That is the story, right?
And you remember, you can go back and
watch this video again if you need to.
So, what you wanna do is you wanna go
down here, remember, you wanna listen
to this normal version 2 to 3 times.
I have a huge family.
I have five brothers and six sisters.
I have a mother and father.
They are my parents.
I have a grandmother.
She's 84 years old.
Listen quickly.
Like, start immediately right now,
when you have all these sentences top
of mind, so you understand them quickly.
Okay?
And then once you have done that,
you're gonna go and listen
to the interactive version 10 times or as
many times as you need in order to be
able to answer the questions out loud.
Remember, you need
to answer them out loud.
Don't just sit like and thinking
about the language.
Say them.
"Yes!"
"No!"
Out loud.
Okay, so if I say,
"I have a huge family",
and then the story goes,
"do I have a small family?"
"No". I don't.
So you say "yes" or "no".
"I have five brothers and six sisters."
"Do I have six sisters?"
Yes, I do.
You don't need to say these things.
You only need to say yes or no.
Yes or no, yes or no.
Quickly.
Boom, without thinking.
Bump, bump, bump, bump, bump.
And that's how that works.
Okay?
So these are the questions here.
I don't think there's anything
else to explain here.
Is my grandmother 74 years old?
No, she isn't, right?
She isn't.
"She isn't" is "she is not."
So you see here, this is a contraction.
In English, we do this, boom.
She isn't.
She is not.
It's the same thing.
Okay?
"Does my sister have two sons?"
"No, she doesn't."
She has one son, right?
So "she does not" becomes "she doesn't."
She doesn't.
It's a contraction.
She does not.
Okay, we say "Does my sister?"
and "she does".
We use that verb, "do".
It's called an auxiliary verb.
But I should not explain
to you the grammar rule.
You just consume, consume
and you will learn this the natural way.
Right?
He is my nephew.
It's my sister's son.
You see here we have
that same thing again.
My nephew.
"Yes, he is."
Okay, here we go.
Let's see if there are
any unknown words here.
"My aunt and my uncle,
they live outside the city."
"Do my aunt and uncle
live in the city center?"
"In the center of the city?"
"No, they don't."
Because they live outside the city.
Right?
Okay.
Yeah, I think that's about it.
"My family likes to play soccer."
"Does my family like to play baseball?"
Baseball is another American
common sport, right?
"No, they don't."
Okay.
All right.
Yep, that's about it.
Remember, "don't ask why."
I know it is very, very tempting to say,
"but Kale, why are they using this verb,
and how does that work?"
"And what is the word order
and what is the conjugation?"
"I don't understand this and that."
Don't ask why.
Trust me.
Trust in your coach.
Because if you ask why, all the time.
And if you get all the explanations
that you want, you're going to get so
frustrated over time because there's so
many rules, there's so many definitions,
there's so many grammar concepts that if
you try to understand why on everything,
you're just going to get confused
and you're going to lose fluency,
lose confidence, and you're
not gonna improve as fast.
Okay, so what do you want to do now?
Listen to the normal version 2 to 3 times,
then listen to the interactive
version 10 times
or as many times as you need
in order to be able to respond
to the questions without looking.
Remember, you can download the audios
and the transcripts if you want
to practice outside the course,
if you're on an airplane,
if you are at a place where you don't have
internet, you can click here,
download transcript and audio file and it
will download to your
phone or to your computer.
And remember, you can go
to the next section only...
You may continue to the next section only
when you're able to answer all
the questions in the interactive
version, correctly!
And how do you
answer the questions?
You say "yes" or "no".
Boom.
Correctly, out loud.
Not like this.
Yes, no, yes, no, yes.
Like confidently, on time, without
looking at the transcript, okay?
And remember, input creates output.
Okay?
So I know it's frustrating to not be able
to speak intuitively automatically
in a language when we're just
starting and that's natural.
We need more input.
We need more input like this.
We need to consume these stories over and
over and over and over and over again.
Listening turns into speaking.
Reading turns into writing.
Okay?
So it's only natural that your speaking
is worse than your listening, okay?
It's not about talking
in the mirror...
Don't waste your time
talking English into the mirror,
practicing speaking like that.
Focus on listening, consuming,
and you will internalize vocabulary
and grammar structures in your brain,
which is a requisite to be able to speak,
to produce the language
automatically, fluently.
Okay?
That is how it works.
And if you wanna practice speaking or if
you want to practice conversations
with other students to gain more
confidence,
to get rid of fear and anxieties
and things like that in a non-judgmental
environment, you can join
the RAIO Conversation Club.
You can get a private coach as well if
you want to accelerate your learning.
Maybe if you have a very specific need,
maybe if you're a football player and need
to learn like vocabulary and talk about
football as fast as possible,
get a private coach.
We have that as well.
We're here to help you.
I will talk about this more in section 18,
but you can check out
that right now if you want to.
More information is below
chapter number six.
Okay, now let's get
started with the exercise.
Okay?
But before you get started
consuming the stories here below,
repeat after me!
"I'll become fluent in English.
I'll never give up on my goal."
Great.
Boom.
Awesome.
Okay, great.
Now keep going.
Listen to the normal version then
listen to the interactive version.
And then I'll see you
in section number three.
Remember, take a break.
I mean, if you want to, you can
keep going and keep up that speed, right?
But remember, consistency over
intensity, very important.
Alright?
Good luck.
See you in the next one.